In this video, you will
learn how to compute
the dot product between
two vectors and how
to compute the norm.
Once you know how to
do these two things,
you'll be able to compute
the cosine similarity score.
Now that you have the intuition
behind the use of cosine of
the angle between two
vector representations
as a similarity metric.
I'll go deeper into
an explanation and
then show you how to
calculate the cosine
similarity metric.
In this section, you will get
the cosine of the inner
angle of two vectors.
Then I'll show you
how the value of
the cosine similarity
is related to
the similarity of the
directions of two vectors.
First, you have to recall some
definitions from algebra.
The norm of a vector or
its magnitude is
written like this.
It's defined to be
the square root
of the sum of its
elements squared.
The dot product between
two vectors is the sum of
the products between
their elements in
each dimension of
the vector space.
Let's take another
look at two of
the corpora from
the last section.
Remember that's in this example,
you have a vector space where
the representations
of the corpora is
given by the number of
occurrences of the
words disease and eggs.
The angle between those
vector representations
is denoted by Beta.
The agriculture corpus is
represented by the vector v,
and the history corpus
is going to be vector
w. The dot products
between those vectors
is defined as follows.
From this equation,
you see that the cosine of
the angle Beta is equal to
the dot-product
between the vectors
divided by the product
of the two norms.
Replacing the actual values from
the vector representations
should give you this expression.
In the numerator,
you'll have the product between
the occurrences of the
words disease and eggs,
and then the denominator,
you have the product
between the norm of
the vector representations of
the agriculture and
history corpora,
ultimately, you should get a
cosine similarity of 0.87.
Feel free to pause and do
the calculations yourself.
But what does this
metric tells you about
the similarity of two
different vectors?
Consider when two vectors are
orthogonal in the vector
spaces that you know so far,
it is only possible to have
positive values
for any dimension.
The maximum angle between pair
of vectors is 90 degrees.
In that case, the cosine
would be equal to 0,
and it would mean that
the two vectors have
orthogonal directions or that
they are maximally dissimilar.
Now let's look at the case where
the vectors have
the same direction.
In this case, the angle
between them is 0 degrees and
the cosine is equal to 1
Because cosine of 0 is just 1.
As you can see, as the cosine of
the angle between two
vectors approaches 1,
the closer their directions are.
Now you know how to get
the cosine similarity
between any pair of vectors.
An important takeaway is that
this metric is proportional
to the similarity between
the directions of the
vectors that you are
comparing and that's for
the vector spaces
you've seen so far,
the cosine similarity takes
values between 0 and 1.
To recap, you have
learned to compute
the cosine similarity
score between two vectors.
For the positive vectors
you have seen so far,
the score is bounded
between 0 and 1.
Note that if you were to take
any cosine similarity score
of a vector with itself,
you will get 1.
If the vectors are
perpendicular, it'll give you 0.
Similar vectors
have higher scores.